# WilsonDiseaseEpigenome
Analysis scripts for identification and visualization of Wilson disease-associated DNA methylation changes in human liver and blood

## The Epigenomic Signature of Wilson Disease
### Mordaunt CE, Kieffer DA, Shibata NM, Czlonkowska A, Litwin T, Weiss KH, Bowlus CL, Sarkar S, Cooper S, Wan YY, Ali M, LaSalle JM, and Medici V.

Wilson Disease (WD) is an autosomal recessive disease caused by mutations in ATP7B encoding a copper transporter. Consequent copper accumulation results in a variable WD clinical phenotype involving hepatic, neurologic, and psychiatric symptoms, without clear genotype-phenotype correlations. Based on prior evidence of effects of methionine metabolism and epigenetic alterations in WD, we hypothesized that alterations in DNA methylation at the whole genome level in liver and blood from two distinct cohorts of subjects could differentiate patients with WD from healthy subjects and from subjects with other liver diseases and could characterize different WD clinical presentations. Whole-genome bisulfite sequencing (WGBS) analyses in liver identified 969 hypermethylated and 871 hypomethylated differentially- methylated regions (DMRs) that specifically identified WD liver samples. WD-specific liver DMRs were associated with genes enriched for functions in folate and lipid metabolism, and acute inflammatory response and could differentiate early from advanced fibrosis. Functional annotation of the WD-specific liver DMRs revealed that hypermethylated loci were enriched in liver-specific enhancers and flanking active liver promoters, while hypomethylated DMRs showed a more tissue ubiquitous overlap with promoters and enhancers. WD-hypermethylated liver DMRs were also enriched for binding sites of transcription factors, including liver development factors Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4 alpha (HNF4A), Retinoid X Receptor alpha (RXRA), Forkhaed Forkhead Box A1 (FOXA1), and FOXA2. Different subsets of WD-specific DMRs genes identified in blood distinguished patients with hepatic and neurological phenotype and overlapped those identified in liver, including those encoding drug-targetable epigenetic regulators such as Histone Deacetylase 5 (HDAC5). Conclusion: We identified a disease-mechanism relevant epigenomic signature of WD that reveals new insights into potential biomarkers and treatments for this complex genetic disease.
